David, Samuel, welcome to Talk By Than Me.
Thank you very much for having me.
Thank you for having me.
Yeah, good to have you, David.
And Samuel, it's always good to have you back on the show.
So we're going to talk about Rust,
some really cool experiences that David had
building a linter that works on a ridiculous number
of different projects and packages.
And Samuel, Rust is obviously core to Pydantic.
And I want to talk a bit about Pydantic
and how you guys have used Rust as well.
It should be a good time.
Yeah, looking forward to it.
Yeah, thanks for having me on.
I've been listening to this podcast for years.
Oh, wonderful.
It's a little like open source.
You get to help create it, you know?
Exactly.
All right, let's do quick introductions.
I know, Samuel, you almost don't need introductions.
Pydantic is so popular.
However, I'm sure there's a couple people out there.
You know, you have, before I let you introduce yourself and stuff just a tiny, just quickly.
You have the honor, distinguished or maybe otherwise, of actually participating in the loudest Talk Python episode ever.
Do you remember that forklift that was driving around behind us?
It was dystopian, wasn't it?
It was the end of PyCon two years ago.
And we started doing the podcast.
And then they started taking down the PyCon around us.
And there's this forklift.
It was, it felt like slight jeopardy, but it was, it was good.
It certainly was a concentration test to have the forklift driving right behind us, beeping as loud as I could.
That was amazing.
All right.
Tell people about yourself and Pydantic and stuff.
Yeah.
So, so I started Pydantic back in 2017 as a side project.
It like toodled along and then 2021, it somehow something happened and the rate of downloads just started to increase a lot.
And started working on it full time in 2022, decided to do this rebuild of the core in Rust because while I was really proud of how much people were using Pydantic, I wasn't particularly proud of its internals.
I had done a bit of Rust, a bit of a couple of other projects that wrap Rust to produce Python packages, but nothing on the scale of Pydantic.
And then eight months into this three month project, I was halfway through and Sequoia very kindly got in touch and offered to invest.
And so I started a company around Pydantic.
And so, yeah, we released Pydantic V2, the rewrite, middle of middle of last year.
And yeah, adoption of Pydantic, as I'm pleased to say, continued to continue to grow.
We had, I think, 307 million downloads in October.
And now we're obviously building commercial stuff, Logfire in particular, but we also do a bit more Rust in Python.
So we have Jitter, which is our very fast Rust based JSON parser, which is available both, is used in Pydantic and as a separate package.
So yeah, that's a kind of summary of my interaction with Rust and Python over the last kind of five, six years.
Amazing.
Yeah.
And it was that move, that pending move or partial move to Rust that actually was the basis of that forklift episode.
David, hello.
Hi.
Yeah.
So I am based in London, like Samuel.
I'm working on a product called Kraken.
That is not anything to do with cryptocurrency or gin.
I think there's a gin or get clients.
It's actually, it came out of a company called Octopus Energy.
Octopus Energy is a renewable energy company and Kraken is basically a big Django monolith that we used at Octopus Energy.
And it worked really well.
And Octopus Energy over the, about the last eight years has grown to be the second biggest energy company in the UK.
And so what we've been doing is using Kraken throughout the world on lots of different, in lots of different countries and lots of different energy companies.
I think the interesting thing about it is it's absolutely massive.
It's, I just counted it today, eight and a half million lines of code for one Django packet.
That is nuts.
I was going to have you elaborate because you said I work on a large Django monolith.
Yeah.
Like it's really large.
That's, that's amazing.
How's there ever been a bigger one?
I don't know.
I should probably ask on Hacker News or something.
Yeah.
Only GitHub knows.
It's, it's big and it's also, there's quite a lot of people working on it at once.
There's like, I just looked at last, last week.
There were over 400 authors at the pull request in one week, all merging stuff together onto the same Python package.
And you'd think it wouldn't work.
I would have said it wouldn't work, but it turns out actually you can run an energy company on that basis.
You know, you're a huge energy company.
You must have a ton of repositories.
Yeah, we got one.
There are some others to be honest, but yeah, mostly, mostly it's one.
Can I ask a question that's, is that continuously deployed or how is that managed in terms of deploys?
So actually each energy company, there are nearly 30 energy companies, each energy company gets their own separate installation.
And every time anyone merges, pretty much, we push it out to all of the energy companies.
You know, it's on the basis that really, if we break something, then we can fix it quickly as well.
And also in the domain of energy, how often do you actually log in to your energy account?
You know, are you going to be on the phone saying, where's my bill?
You know what I mean?
So, you know, we can get away with that kind of thing, which maybe we couldn't do that if it was, I don't know, payments gateway or something like that.
Or if you built a package that shipped over PyPI to hundreds of millions of people.
Yeah.
Well, we released Pydantic 2.10 yesterday and we've definitely got quite a few issues back.
So we definitely break stuff too.
Don't, for a second thing, we don't break anything.
We don't mind the things that are unintentionally broken because we can go and fix them.
It's when we change an API.
That's the painful thing for us rather than actually, weirdly bugs are in some sense, like less severe than like getting the wrong API.
Yeah, that's got to be really tricky to say, you know, we need to add, we need to add a parameter to this function.
Or the whole two, one to two switch, you deprecated quite a few methods and stuff as well.
Right.
And in some sense, deprecated methods added parameters are relatively easy because someone's, you know, is relatively clear to see what's happened.
It's when it's like subtle changes in behavior, like, do you apply an, like, integer constraint before or after a function that wraps the integer validation?
Like things like that, if you decide to change it because you're like, well, this is marginally more correct.
Is it worth making marginally more correct for a lot of people spending a lot of time very, very confused?
Yeah, that can definitely generate some open issues on the issue tracker.
Also, the parsing.
I think you all changed the rules about the parsing, right?
One of the pieces of magic of Pydantic is if you had a list and you said it was a list of integers, but it happened to be strings that could be converted to integers that would just become a list of integers.
But I feel like you, you change the strictness or looseness of that behavior at one point, right?
Yeah, we made it a little bit more strict in places.
We said things like, you can't coerce an integer to a string because basically, like the original semantics of Pydantic was like, we'll just call integer on the thing and see if it's an int.
And that mostly worked.
We'll call list on something and see if it's a list.
Problem is with string, you can call string on everything and then you'll get back a string, right?
So it's no longer a valid test of is it a string to call string on it.
Right.
What time did this happen?
It happened at angle bracket class date time dot date time dot.
Yeah, right.
Exactly.
So yeah, we, and that's another thing because no one writes their unit tests for the weird edge cases of what's valid.
But then if you're a bank and one bank is sending you strings for a number or numbers for a string and you change it, like we change how it works.
That is that's problematic.
But luckily the banks don't pay us anything in sponsorship.
So I don't mind breaking it for banks as a rule.
Well, you see these, these are the bootstrapped struggling small businesses.
They're not ready.
These banks to have enough money to, you know, support open source.
We're just trying to persuade them to use log fire right now.
So I'll stop being rude about banks.
Yes, no, of course.
It's a, well, it's a really tricky balance, right?
To can, to can get those folks to open their checkbooks and pay for it.
Right.
They, they don't have charity usually in their bylines, bylines, whatever, or they're supposed to be doing, right?
Like they, but with something like log fire, they can say, well, here's a service that we can use.
And by using that, we might be able to support Pydantic and the other things that are important to us.
So I think that's, that's great.
You know, tell people just real quickly about log fire out there.
Yeah, absolutely.
So log fire is an observability platform built obviously by the team behind Pydantic.
If you go to log fire along the, along the top, the, the, I suppose the, the two things that make it different from some of the stuff that's come before is log files built on open telemetry.
So on open standards that mean that, yeah, the rails of that, where the data is being transferred are on an open standard.
And if, if you decide you didn't want to use the log file platform anymore, you can send that data to anything else that supports open telemetry.
But unlike lots of other companies in our space, instead of using open telemetry as an excuse to abandon the SDK space and just say, use the horrible local telemetry SDK directly.
We have the log file package, which tries to make that super nice and easy to use.
And then the other big change we have, I don't, I think there'll be an example, maybe further on down the page, but like we, maybe, maybe there isn't one right there, but like we allow you to write SQL directly against your data.
So.
Oh, interesting.
Okay.
Use kind of click ops to go around and do survey.
So if you look here, right, you're, you can go and like write SQL to query your data.
And so there are, although we're still early, there are things you can do in log file that you can't, you cannot, and then they've been able to do in like one of the big incumbents like data doc, because it's just SQL.
And it's obviously much easier to learn for you, much easier for LLMs to write.
So we have the like plausible chance in the future that you could basically chat with log fire and say, what's wrong with my app?
And the agent can go off and run SQL to investigate things in a way that is much harder if you have your own dialect, but yeah, right.
SQL against data of the scale is a monumentally difficult challenge.
And one of the things we struggle with a lot, but we think it's useful enough for developers that we like put the time in.
So you can write any SQL you want, except for please only do the ones that have indexes.
So it's so our new databases time is data fusion.
So there were no indexes, but yeah, if you do, there are queries you can do now that just like eat memory.
And we, we have to find ways around them.
And that's actually the hardest bit is like, whether intentionally or not, there are people, you know, there are SQL you can write, which is enormously like heavy to go and compute.
And so we have to be able to find ways to like process that without taking down other customers.
I suppose is the point.
You don't want to do a denial of service on yourself.
Right.
I mean, the definition of DOS is that like the, the effort required to DOS is exponentially lower than the effort required to process it.
And writing SQL is the ultimate example of that.
Yeah, it absolutely is.
Okay.
Well, that's a really interesting idea to have SQL there rather than like, let's just kick click around our UI until we get an answer and those sorts of things.
Yeah.
So I think one of the things that we've got some dashboards on that page, but the idea is like, sure, we'll go and give you a nice dashboard for HTTP traffic and like response codes.
So, I think it's the next one down, but if you want to go and edit that, like the point is that you can basically, next one after that.
It's the point is you can go and customize that however you like by just editing the SQL if you so wish.
So it's like, it's trying to save with alerts.
So we have, I guess you would say century style alerting, but again, that's all configurable because in the end, it's just SQL that you can go and edit.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Well, congratulations.
I, I know many people were curious about when they heard that, Hey, Pydantic starting a company, they have funding.
It's like, what are they going to exactly going to do with that?
And, you know, maybe a lot of people were worried just like, Hey, it now costs money to just use the library.
Right.
And, and I don't think anyone ever thought it would have been a good idea to literally have like Pydantic pro where you have to like have some API key to install Pydantic, but it could definitely have been what most open source, open source companies do is they have like open source project as a service.
And then they start, if not taking out features, then adding new features to the paid version.
Right.
And I was super keen that Pydantic continued to be successful as an open source project.
And so we did the slightly weird thing about building something which is in a different space from, from what we're known for.
And that definitely has its challenges, but I think it's overall, I think it's the right decision.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Well, congratulations.
Beautiful looking project, service here and so on.
And I think maybe one of the big pieces of news here, and that's not the one, although that is awesome.
Is that's where we're going?
Uh, is this, this jitter?
What is this jitter?
David, are you familiar with this jitter?
I have, I've heard of it.
Okay.
Yeah.
So parsing JSON is super important.
Tell us about this.
JSON is, is a, is a big thing.
And when we, when I first got Pydantic version two with, with the rust core, we were using
Surdy, which is the kind of default, parsing library in rust.
The problem is that Surdy wants to parse, the entire JSON object before it returns you
some representation of that.
And jitter came out of this idea that we could do, parsing as we do validation.
So if you have it, imagine you have a list of integers, you, instead of what you would
traditionally do is you would parse the JSON, you would allocate some vector of all of the
values in that list.
Each of which would have to be itself a like, you know, I'm up here are the different types
you might get in JSON.
Cause you don't know what it's going to be upfront.
And then once you finished doing that, you can then go and do validation on that.
Uh, and jitter, the idea is it's an iterative JSON parser that hence the name.
So you could, you can effectively get, if you think of it in Python parlance as like,
it's a rule that gives you back each individual element of the, of the JSON as you go along.
Um, at the, the truth is right now inside Pydantic core, we're still using the, this JSON value,
which is Jitter's variant of doing the whole parsing first.
There are a few optimizations that we get to get away with.
So there are some really neat things in JSON.
Like if your strings, for example, John Doe, you're showing on the screen there is, does not include any escape sequences
like backslash, N or unicode sequences, then you can pass, pass a pointer to that, range of the underlying
JSON object as a string, instead of having to allocate that string.
So we do some like clever optimizations like that.
I see the plan in a future version of Pydantic either as a like opt-in feature in V2 or as V3 is to be able to do the, the iterative parsing.
What's crazy about Jitter is, well, one, once we started work on this, we've actually got to the point where Jitter is full on faster than Serti in any use case,
even if you're not doing the iterative thing, but also this iterative JSON parsing thing is exactly what you want when you want to allow people to query JSON in, in a way like, JSONB in Postgres.
And so we went and use Jitter to implement, JSON querying inside data fusion when we moved our database to data fusion.
And it was just like very luckily.
Um, yeah, it happens to be exactly the right concept you need for like, for querying JSON where you want to iterate over looking for the like string foo and then stop as soon as you find it.
Awesome.
So the code samples you got on the repo here, got a lot of semicolons in them.
Is there a, is it, is it interoperable with Python as well?
Or is it just a rust?
Yes.
So if you, if you go up actually, it's a, it's a, this is a monorepo.
So if you go up into source into crates, which is, so this is, you have a bunch of different crates in here, but if you look at Jitter Python, this is the, and I think if you go down, you'll see an example of calling Jitter directly from Python.
So the reason we released this as a Python package was a large AI company who I don't know if they wanted me to name them, basically were using Pydantic V1 so heavily, but they needed some of the functionality of Jitter.
Um, and so they basically begged us to release this as a separate package so that they could, they could use Jitter themselves before they upgraded to Pydantic V2.
In fact, the open AI SDK uses Jitter.
So I think that is public information who it might have been.
Um, but yeah, the other interesting thing that came out, which again, I'm ashamed to say I had no idea would be useful.
This idea of iteratively, iteratively passing JSON until you stop effectively turns out to be incredibly helpful in LLMs where, as you see on, on screen here, you can basically pass an incomplete JSON string.
And obviously because, LLMs stream you the response, you can use this to effectively do validation as you receive structured responses.
Right.
Work on a JSON stream instead of a JSON response.
Yeah.
So, I've been surprised by how like the legs that this has had, which I wasn't expecting when we, when we first started it.
But yeah, the, the nice bit is it's all the input, the actual JSON parsing is rust, but then we, we have the logic to, yeah, basically access that from Python, both in this package and in Pydantic core.
Awesome.
Well, you sent me over to this cargo section or the crate section rather.
And looking here, I see the cargo dot Toml, PI project dot Toml, some source.
I think this might be in the source.
We've got some rust.
I think that this might be David, a good, good way to start leading into working with Russ and, you know, this is kind of the, the destination of your whole presentation.
You gave it pike on Italy, right?
Absolutely.
Yeah.
So, well, we thought it's alluded to it already, but yeah, Python and rust can interoperate, which is an amazing fact.
Um, I think it's so easy to think, oh, well, within a particular application, you know, you're stuck with the programming language that you've picked.
Uh, but actually Python was really designed originally from what I understand to be a kind of glue language.
So, you know, you're not going to use the same thing as a kind of glue language.
You're not going to use the same thing as a kind of glue language.
So, you're not going to use the same thing as a kind of glue language.
Or even maybe less obvious ones like SQLAlchemy and other places, there's optional speedups, speedup C extension type things, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
And in the standard library, of course.
Um, but you're not writing C or you're not writing, I think NumPy might even have Fortran.
Um, you're, you're writing Rust.
Um, but you're, you're, you're ending up with something that's, that's the same as you might have done with a different lower level language.
Um, and that allows you to use Python for all of the nice stuff like domain modeling and, and, you know, just that thing that we're all familiar with.
And the reason we like Python is we can be very productive with it, but just occasionally you, you hit something with Python, whereas it's basically slow.
Um, it's, it's, there's a high level language there and those abstractions are coming at a cost.
You know, we talk about the GIL as well.
You know, the GIL gets in the way of using all of the CPUs on our machine, but that's not the case for extension modules.
They can leave the GIL behind if you want.
So you can actually, by writing these extension modules, get more out of Python than you might have thought.
Um, and Rust is a pretty new language that's learned a lot of lessons from older languages.
And, it's, I mean, I think it's really lovely.
Um, it, it, you feel like you're in the presence of greatness.
Almost.
Well, I wanted to ask you, I wanted to ask both of you this question before we get too far down this path is Python often is referred to as CPython.
Cause the, the runtime, the core is all built in C not Python.
Right.
And the original interop story is around C extensions and CFFI and those kinds of things.
And so why not just, why not just pick C for Pydantic or for your linter, David, you know, it's everyone else is doing it.
It had been doing it.
Good question.
I mean, maybe sometimes it would be the right answer, but rough is, rust is offering something very different.
It's offering like a really nice, developer ecosystem.
Um, all the tooling is brilliant.
Um, and also I think security is a big, a big thing.
Um, so many security problems come from like mismanagement of pointers.
Um, rust is designed so that the compiler won't let you make a certain kind of mistake that happens all the time.
It happens all over the place in, the NCS.
Yeah.
I put it more simply than that.
I'm not clever enough to write C safely.
Uh, and so I get that pointer pointer.
What are we doing here?
So I mean, like the, the good one way of good way of looking at it is that you, you can have the unsafe, mode in rust where you effectively lose those constraints.
And sometimes there are the occasional place where you need to use it.
And then when we do that inside Pydantic core, myself or David Hewitt, who's a much better rust developer than I am, we agonize for genuinely minutes at a time over how exact, whether or not it is really safe to write that one line of code is unsafe.
And whether there was any possible case in which it could lead to problems.
If you write an app in C, every single line is unsafe.
And if you write a, if you're agonizing even over just a string, like a S print F equivalent.
Yeah.
You don't.
And it doesn't have to be eight and a half million lines of code for it to be incredibly hard to go through every single line of that.
So I forget there's like 40,000 lines of code in Pydantic core.
It is inconceivable that we could have written that in C and have anywhere near the confidence we have with it written in rust that it was memory safe.
We have had one memory safety issue reported in Pydantic core.
And it is, it was a side effect of something deep in Pyo three, which in turn was the, was, was a result of like, greenlit doing something crazy that technically the guild didn't think you could do.
I mean, that was the, that's the level of complexity we have.
Another example is so Jitter, which I showed you, we, we released Jitter a year ago.
Now it is the most downloaded JSON parser in Python other than the one in the standard library.
No one has ever reported a bug in it in terms of it parsing stuff incorrectly, except for impartial mode.
I think, now I said that someone will probably go and find one, but like it has been, that just wouldn't happen in Python.
You could not write that reliable.
Um, yeah.
So that's one of the ways it, one of the ways it achieves this is by like really stopping you doing all the stuff that you would have.
expect to be able to do.
I always, whenever I sort of tell someone about rust, I, I say, you know, if you have a string in rust and you assign it to a variable, say X, and then like, and then you like store that X in Y.
So you do Y equals X.
Then you can't use X anymore.
Because it's gone.
Uh, and I mean, that's, that seems very strange.
Um, you know, and it seems strange maybe as Python developers, because we don't actually hardly ever, maybe never need to think about memory safety.
Um, you know, we've got that luxury, but once you go down lower level, you are starting to, and, and what's going on there with the kind of.
You can't have X and Y both pointing to that string.
Um, I mean, you can, if you copy that memory so that there's then separate bits of memory in X and Y, but it's kind of making you think in detail about where is the memory for this program?
Whereas Python just ownership, right?
The ownership of who owns this.
I can give you another good practical example.
So I was saying earlier in the, in the jitter case, we have this point where some strings, you can, many strings, you can, instead of having to copy the whole of the string out of the chunk of, data within the original input of Jason, you can literally refer to that slice of data as a, with, as a pointer.
Literally say, this is, this is the string itself.
And you'd have to copy.
But that means the type you get back for when you parse a string in jitter is what is called a cow in, in, in rust.
And it is either an owned string, e.g. when you've copied it, or it's a reference to the underlying chunk of the array.
And so that gets quite difficult when you're actually writing code with that because you can't go and access that string after you validated after you've passed the next token, because in theory that could have now changed.
If you were writing that and see, you'd have to basically manually keep track of, am I accessing that cow in the right place?
Whereas in rust, where you wouldn't have a cow in, in C, but you could presumably have some similar construct.
Rust basically takes care of that.
As soon as you go and do another piece of validation, it immediately says, no, no, you can't even access that previous cow because the lifetime of it has now been used when you've called, into the, the parser to get the next token.
And so it, it's a very neat, it basically stops you from having to think about that.
And that means you can actually do, not more unsafe, but more complex things knowing that the time, the, the, the, the borrower checker is gonna save you in the end.
You can try and do something.
And if it doesn't work, the borrower checker will say it's not possible.
And if the borrower checker says it is possible, you're safe to access that reference to a string that you passed like 50 lines of code higher up.
Yeah.
That sounds, it sounds like a paradigm shift, but also super valuable.
So I know primarily Python people are listening.
So this word might not make any sense, but is this a compile time check or is this a runtime check?
We don't really think about compiling much in Python, but.
Right.
We don't think about it, but you can, you sort of, we have, you can think of import time when you do different stuff or you think about static typing when you go and run pyright over your code.
Yeah.
And that is like very similar in, in some ways to compile time.
Um, it's also one of the big disadvantages of rust.
I mean, people think rust is faster than Python.
In many cases, if you write your script, it's a lot faster to run it in Python than it is in rust because it'll take two seconds to run in rust or in Python or a few hundred milliseconds to run in Python and 10 seconds to compile in rust.
So yeah, it is not universally the case that getting the, the, the late, like yeah, the development cycle is faster than rust.
It depends how many times you run the code, right?
If you're going to run it once or twice.
Yeah.
And you've got to create it to run it.
Well, you know, it maybe it took you 10 minutes versus 20 minutes.
And it's another of the great powers of, of the Python ecosystem and of pipe AI that we, the maintainers of, of, Python packages built in rust can take care of compiling that rust once distribute all of the binaries.
And then when people go and install it, we don't have to compile it.
If you were using most other, if you were using cargo, you would have to take care.
I mean, putting the controversy over 30 to one side for a minute, you would have to take care of compiling that code yourself every time you wanted to go and go and use it.
Whereas actually pipe AI does an amazing job of distributing compiled rust for virtually every ecosystem, every architecture, and it just working when you install it.
Yeah, absolutely.
Something I just wanted to say about the memory management.
Like it is a compile time, but actually it also, you can also use reference counting and things like that.
Um, it's just opt in.
So there are lots of interesting tools, for allowing you to do, runtime checking of things.
And sometimes that's what you have to do.
You're like, Oh, I can't really do this just using stuff that's working on your own.
stuff that's worked out before the program even runs.
I do need to do it at runtime, but it's fine.
I can do that for this particular data type.
And, and there's an API to do it and it will come with other trade-offs.
Um, but you know, it's, it's giving you that control, but it's giving you control over things, which if you've only ever programmed in Python, which to be honest, pretty much.
I mean, I used to do PHP a bit, but you know, I'm, my mind is soaked up in Python and coming to rust.
It's like, Oh, this is, this is a completely different way of thinking.
It's like the red pill and the matrix.
You're like, what is this?
Yeah.
It's nice though.
It's hard though.
I'm not going to lie.
Like I feel very confused a lot of the time.
I suppose this is the time for the obligatory.
The white house recommends the future software should be written in memory stuff languages such as rust and Python.
So, right.
That's always nice to have around to think about whether or not that's an argument in favor of rust or not, depending on your take on a particular white house is another question altogether, but it's definitely a thing.
Well, you know what?
I, I will draw your attention to the date of this.
It's gotten more.
New leadership recommends.
Yeah.
Next year.
We'll see if they're like, assembly all the way.
We've decided.
No.
Okay.
All right.
Let's, let's carry on with your, your story, David.
So you, you wrote this thing called an import linter, which is kind of a unique, there's lots of linters in Python, right?
There's, PyFlake, there's rough, another rust, success story, I suppose.
But this one checks more architecturally, right?
And you want to use this on your, your small little repo that you all are running over there.
Tell us about that story.
Yeah.
I mean, I wrote it, I wrote it for Kraken, but actually I had the idea for it in a previous, company on, you know, it was still a complex monolith, but nowhere near as big.
And to be honest, I find even in quotes, quite small projects with just a handful of files, it's still useful, to think about the architecture of those files.
And I think for me, architecture is ultimately about dependencies and, something that Python lets you do, which I don't think is very good is that you can end up with lots of, cross dependencies between different modules and packages within a particular Python project.
Uh, so for example, you know, I mean, we know that sometimes you get a circular import errors, but this is something a bit wider than that.
Like possibly if you've got two sibling sub packages, you might have one module, which imports from something in one, in the other sibling package.
And then there'd be like another modules that import the other way.
the other way and it, it won't stop Python from loading up, but there's a, there's a sort of, there's a circular dependency conceptually between those two packages.
They're tightly coupled.
Yeah.
And, and yeah, this is just one example of the kind of architectural rule you might want to impose on a project to say, well, actually I want there to be a dependency only one way.
I want one of those packages to be kind of lower level and one of them to be higher level.
Um, or maybe you'd have like five packages that are all siblings and, you know, I call this layer really, but where you maybe, you know, say, yeah, this can import all the ones below it, but nothing can import the ones above it.
And you sort of think of them in a sort of stack of.
Yeah.
Um, and so here's the details, here's the public interface and then things use the public interface.
They shouldn't reach down below and, and vice versa.
Yeah.
That's certainly one thing that you can do with it.
Um, but it's, it's mostly focused on controlling dependencies between packages as a whole.
Um, you can also do it for individual modules, but, like, so what it does is it uses imports at the proxy for a dependency.
Um, so it will statically analyze all of the imports in your module.
Um, and then it will build a directed graph.
Um, so you can then think of your module, think of your package as like every module is a node and a graph with, arrows pointing between all of them.
And the arrows are the imports.
Um, sometimes you call them edges or whatever.
Um, and, and then what important inter allows you to do is to write contracts that are just in YAML or Tomo, which just say, all right, these, these are the rules.
I want you to check.
Um, when you run the linter and it will then, you know, you can put it in CI or fail.
If someone adds an import the wrong way.
And I, I found it's, it's fascinating to see, like, if you have an idea for an architecture and then you put an import linter contract on and then discover all the places where you're breaking it.
They're almost always quite interesting, interesting things.
And you're like, yeah, actually this is a bit of a problem.
Like it needs to be able to kind of untangle it.
It is genuinely, you know, some conceptual tangling.
It would simplify things if we didn't do it.
Yeah.
It's kind of a higher order code smell.
People are familiar with this idea from refactoring a code smell.
Like there's, it's not wrong in that it won't run, but you kind of turn your nose up at you.
Like, oh, oh, right.
And this is that, but not at a, oh, it takes too many parameters, but like, why is it all tied together like this?
Can we think about it better?
Right.
You know, and you can do things like say all of these modules are independent.
So, so they don't import anything from each other.
Um, I mean, this is like just my whole mentality for, for architecting Python packages.
And I find it, it works really well.
Um, and I think the fact that we've got these rules in the world, right?
Um, and the fact that we've got these rules in place is probably a big reason why we're still able to have a thousand PRs a week.
All happening in different time zones without that many faults.
Cause we've got, we've, we've architected it.
So say we know that there aren't any.
Imports between say two energy companies or between two territories.
You've got to install your competitors version as well to use yours.
Yeah, exactly.
So, so it's, you know, it's giving us.
It's giving us, it's allowing us to think about things as being more independent.
And so like someone can make a change in say Spain, and it's not going to break something in Australia.
Uh, because you're pretty confident because they aren't importing anything from there.
Does that mean in theory, if you've got this, that you could use this within, for example, CI to only run unit tests on systems that have changed or direct descendant, dependence of that package?
Yeah.
So we do do that.
Perfect.
Yeah.
Cause we've got a lot of money on CI.
Um, and so we've had to invest a lot of money to like figure out how do we narrow down the tests?
Um, so yeah.
Yeah.
That's awesome.
That's a great observation.
Yeah.
And, and actually, yeah, this, this is all based on a, an underlying library called Grimp, which is, I kind of broke the libraries up.
It's a little bit like what, what you did Samuel with Pydantic, Pydantic core.
So import linter is pure Python.
Um, but it has a dependency, which is a grit, which is Grimp, which is, I mean, it's got Python and Rust in at the moment.
Um, but that is just a Python API for building a graph and then you can explore the graph and you can do things like it's really quite a useful tool.
If you're just interested to know something about code base, you know, you can, just type in build, build me a graph of this.
This package say, and then you could say, tell me all of the downstream modules of this module, and then we'll explore the whole graph and like give you a set of modules or tell me all the upstream modules of this.
So you can tell what dependencies are, or you can like do, you know, what's the shortest path between this module and this module.
Um, so it makes sense.
Yep.
Yeah.
Can you get it to do dependencies?
Think the things you pip install.
Oh, I see what you mean.
Well, you can build the graph with multiple packages.
Um, but like, I don't even know if that's really, is that possible?
Can you have two installable PI PI packages that depend on?
No, I'm more, I'm more wondering if I can use this to visualize, well, what parts of my app.
So I, I, I know that I have this dependency and I have to have it to run, but what parts of my app are using that library?
So if I wanted to change it or whatever, you know what I mean?
Like, cause you can, you can build a tree from there's a pit package for it, or UV will give you a tree of dependencies, but that is based on what packages require what other packages to be installed.
It doesn't actually say what's being imported from where.
So if you have an issue with URL in three, what is the actual like graph of where URL in three is being imported rather than what packages depend on it?
Uh, there's a, there's a flag when you build the graph, which is, include external packages.
Yeah.
And if you pass it, then it will include them, but it doesn't include them.
It just like includes the root name.
Um, if you wanted the whole thing, then you'd say, build me the graph of, I mean, that would work as well, but you could say,
build me the graph of Django and cracking whatever.
Um, or you can say, build me the graph of cracking with external packages.
And then, then you just see like Django would just be a node in the graph, but it would just be one node.
Yeah.
That'd be great.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
Hmm.
So the story is this was working, but slow.
Yes.
Um, yeah, like just as an example, one of our contracts and we had lots of contracts.
One contract was taking six minutes to check.
Um, the reason for this is because actually it is quite, algorithmically expensive to check whether or not certain rules are being followed because, it does.
It does.
It's not like just doing a kind of search.
Um, it's actually looking for indirect imports.
Um, it's like, it's like a path finding algorithm to sort of see, well, do you end up here via this other thing that you didn't ask about?
Um, and yeah.
Um, and yeah, so certain things were taking a really long time and that was costing us money because we run this, you know, hundreds, if not thousands of times a day.
Um, and it all adds up.
Um, and it also just slows down, you know, your pull request.
You want to get the green quicker.
Um, so I had heard that rust was interoperable with Python.
I didn't really know anything about it.
Um, and I found this library called PI03, which is a rust library and it makes it, I'm not going to say easy, but it makes it easier.
Yeah, it makes it surprisingly easy to, to write rust extension modules and gives you some of all the tooling in place.
And I would say, you know, you're writing a lot less code than you would be if you're writing a C extension module, because it's sort of a nice, it's a really nice API for, creating these interoperable, compiled modules.
So like I'd started by just finding, finding the function that was taking all the time and have millions and millions and millions of calls.
Um, I was like, why don't I just write that as in rust?
And I kind of just sort of almost copied and pasted it over and like cobbled together some pretty rubbish rust that did basically exactly the same.
Um, and, it was a thousand times slower.
Um, well done.
Well done.
But, but there's a good reason for that, which is I just zoomed in too close.
So because that, because that function was called a lot of times, there is actually a cost in, in crossing the boundary.
So I just had to step one level up and like wrap all of those calls for that function in rust instead.
So there's only one call from piping to rust.
And then suddenly.
Right.
Majorly quicker.
I mean, I think that that particular problematic contract went from about six minutes to one minute.
Now that is to be honest.
And that was brilliant, but that is not, that's just scratching the surface of how much quicker it could get.
Um, but still a six times speed up for relatively little work and basically just writing the same algorithm, but with some curly brackets, and a bit of head scratching.
Yeah.
Um, I was able to deliver something without having ever done anything in rust and it was, and it really made a difference, you know, and saved us lots of money.
Um, yeah.
Yeah.
So that was, that was, and now you're a rust developer as well.
Now I'm a rust developer and I read, and I'm, you know, I want to move more, more of Grimp into rust.
Um, another example, even less work was, we had a problem with, translations.
So, there's a kind of standard for doing translations called fluent and some of the listeners may come across it.
Um, and there are libraries for it in all sorts of different languages, including Python and rust.
And we realized that it was responsible for almost all of the bootstrap time of our application in production, was loading and scanning these translation files.
Um, you know, it was pretty problematic.
It was, it was like really spiky as well.
And you can see sometimes it would spike to like nine minutes.
Yeah.
Um, and we knew it was all in this translations thing.
And someone pointed out, look, there's a rust library for this.
So all we need to do is just link them up.
And so they, it wasn't, it wasn't actually me, but, they just wrote this pie three crate that was a lot of different.
Um, a crate that, a crate is like a rust library.
Yeah.
Um, you know, probably only about 10, 15 lines of code just glued the two things together.
Um, and it was, it was really like not very much work.
Um, and compile that.
And it just completely sorted the problem out.
We, we went from eight minutes to 30 seconds.
Um, and you know, of that, like the, the, you know, that 30 seconds is other stuff.
You know, I think, I think it's, it's from being something that took several minutes to being virtually instant.
Um, crazy, but really hardly any work.
And I think that that's a really good example of where as Python developers, we should be aware.
This is an option.
If something says something slow, you might just, I mean, rust has so many good libraries.
You might just be able to like to glue it up and job done.
Yeah.
Um, one thing I would add the, the overhead of calling into pilot three has, has dropped
a lot.
I don't know how long ago that was you, you were trying, but I think it's, yeah, reduced
significantly.
So, I mean, I, I did this quite a lot of the same work in pirantic core to avoid the overhead
of calling into and out of it lots of times.
And I think that's less of a thing now than it used to be.
That's good to hear.
Yeah.
Cool.
Um, one point I want to make is I think that's really interesting David to say that,
Hey, there's this whole equivalent of pipe.
Yeah.
I called cargo, or you can get these libraries just like, I mean, create, sorry that you get
installed with cargo that you can get all of these prebuilt, pre-tested libraries and maybe
just put a wrapper on them and do some amazing stuff.
I just started using this web server at the Python layer for called granion.
And you're like, well, how many people are working on it?
It's got up to 3000 stars now.
Is that enough to trust?
But if you really look at it, it's really using just hyper, right?
And hyper, hyper is a library that, excuse me, that is got like 14,000 GitHub stars, 400 contributors.
And like, oh, you know, it's kind of this cool application is something of a wrapper around
this really popular and well-known thing, right?
I think we'll see more of this kind of stuff.
Absolutely.
And Giovanni, who's who works on this is also working on, it's our loop, basically an alternative
to UV loop.
I don't know if that's in here as well.
I maintain, watch files, which is the, the, the like file watching library used by UVicorn
and some other things.
And that is again, wrapping wrapping a rust library for getting fast system notifications.
And also our Toml, which is the fastest Toml parser in Python, which is again, just wrapping
the wrapping the rust library.
So there are a number of places where you can get enormous performance improvements and,
and indeed, like a fundamentally more reliable libraries because you're building in rust when
you're doing complex, particularly multi-threaded things by, by like relying on rust.
Yeah.
These libraries seem to be very good quality and well thought through.
That's my, been my experience somehow attracts people that are very thorough because you can't
really program in rust unless you're thorough because you can't get it to compile.
I think it's hard to say rust does have a bit of a problem with abandoned libraries.
I think that is, I think if we didn't put, put, call it out, I know David, you and I were
speaking at a, an event where there was one particular chap who had a bee in his bonnet about
that exact issue.
I think he was slightly overblown on it, but there is definitely an issue with some abandoned,
some abandoned libraries in, in rust, but like, I mean, same as true in Python in its own place,
but, but you're right.
There are also libraries that are abandoned and remaining incredibly good quality.
So Jitter uses a library for parsing floats.
I didn't know this, but the complexity of parsing floats from strings is a entire subject of academic interest.
There are eight different algorithms for doing it with different performance, depending on whether or not it is
the, the structure of the float.
And there was a library that does this very well.
And the library was abandoned, but it worked perfectly.
And eventually the guy replied to my email and went and fixed it.
So, I mean, the, the quality, the, the quality is very high in my experience.
Yeah.
I just make the point.
I think, you know, there's over half a million packages and PI PI as well.
And I'm sure that there's a non-trivial amount of them that people are no longer maintaining as well.
Sometimes things are done and sometimes they're abandoned and it's hard to tell the difference, you know, like, no, I haven't updated it in two years.
Cause it's done, but also, also, okay.
It's hard to tell the difference until you're three weeks in and you don't want to back out of using that library and you realize that actually it's, it's actually not done.
It's not done.
But nobody wants to write.
All right, David, before we wrap this up, I would really like to have you talk us through sort of the, the tool chain workflow of, I've got this idea.
I want to maybe, you know, rewrite it and rust.
If you've spoken about it, what are the building blocks or the moving pieces?
What do people need to know?
Absolutely.
Okay.
So, the things you need to know is first of all, the thing you're going to create is an extension module, which is like a built, a built compiled thing.
Uh, and that is going to end up being a Python wheel.
Um, and what you want to do is you, when you release something on pipe AI, you want to have wheels for all the different versions of Python and chip architectures and things.
So that's kind of like some of the complexity.
So that's kind of the end goal.
We want to end up with these built versions of Python.
And then we want to end up with these versions of Python that are going to contain some Python code, but also some compiled things for, you know, macOS under Python 312 or whatever like that.
So that's kind of the end goal.
Rustup is kind of like one level up and it's maybe a bit like PyPI if people have used that, but it sort of does a bit more than that.
Maybe also a bit like UV these days where you can UV install Python based on what you asked for or just create a virtual environment and it'll just grab the tools you need to make that happen.
I'd say that cargo is closer to UV probably, which is the next thing I'll talk about.
But Rustup is like one step up and it's like it's for managing the versions of Rust that are on your computer and the versions of cargo that are on your computer, which are cargo is the package manager for Rust.
Yeah.
So what you'll do, your first step is to go to the Rust website and install Rustup.
And then hopefully at the command line, you'll be able to type Rust C and then you can compile a Rust file if you want to.
But you don't actually need to do that because that's what you use cargo for.
So your main kind of thing that you're typing all the time when you're using Rust is cargo and then some kind of command.
And so you've installed Rustup and you've got cargo.
Then what you'd want to do is create a project.
And you can create a project using cargo.
You could do cargo new and then I'll give you a whole file system structure and you'll be able to run it and run tests and all that.
Very nice.
And that is how you would install the latest version of PI03.
So you would, I probably would just go over onto crates.io, which is the PI PI equivalent and look at what the version is of PI PI and then write it in a file.
I think there is a cargo command probably for adding it.
It's cargo add.
But it's also worth saying that matcher in is a big part of the ecosystem.
Do you want to introduce matcher in because I think that's about where that comes in.
So, so cargo is the cargo is the thing that Rust, Rust people will be using to compile these things, but you can't just use that on your own because you need the whole pip installing kind of side of things.
So you can use cargo and just create an extension module, but then you need to like give it the right name and copy it into the right place.
So there's a bit of kind of gluing that needs to happen.
And that is what matcher in is for.
Why do we need two tools?
Well, cargo is the rust side of things, but matcher in is actually just a pip installable Python package.
So what you'll do is in your, in the Python project that you want to rustify, you will do go into your activate your virtual environment or whatever, and then do pip install matcher in.
And then you've got this tool for matcher in and you could even do matcher in a new project or something like that.
I can't remember what the command is.
What, what I had to do was I had a preexisting project, so I couldn't just do it like that.
But it might be quite a nice way to learn is to, to follow the matcher in docs to do a new project.
And what matcher in allows you to do is I think you, you might edit your rust code.
And then you would type matcher in develop.
And then it would compile your rust code, but it would, it would kind of install it locally so that you can work with it.
And then the final piece of this picture is how that gets onto PI PI.
Matcher in also gives you some tools for that.
There's a, there's a command called generate CI, I think, which gives you.
It just spits out YAML for the, for whatever CI provider you want.
Yeah.
And that's really helpful as well.
Because I, I, I've given a.
Yeah.
Well, I think one of the things you both have to deal with here is releasing a package, a wheel for this is not just, well, let's zip up the Python files and put them up there.
Right.
You're compiling native code and that means you need variations.
Yeah.
I think we, I think Pydantic core releases 60 something different wheels to cover all different possible combinations of Python version and architecture.
But I mean, I think I would basically second what David was saying.
Matcher in in particular, it does an amazing job of smoothing out the kind of rough edges between Rust and Python.
Rust has had a good, relatively good story on package management for some time.
Python is just coming, but often when you're trying to do these things, it's the, like trying to get one to speak to the other and working out what the hell is going wrong.
And what does that file need to be all that?
Like sim link between some DLL and some other place.
Matcher in effectively gets rid of that whole challenge for you and just works.
Right.
And lets you, lets you work on it.
Like you're, it's as easy as writing Python or, or Rust interacting with the two.
Yeah.
Cause cargo and Rust C will output Rust conventions, but Python wants C extension conventions naming like .so versus Dynlib and things like that.
Right.
And getting the inputs right.
And yeah.
So what your work, once you've sort of set it all up, what your workflow looks like is, if, if you're, if you haven't changed any of the Rust, then, you know, maybe like you run tests, you just run py test whatever.
And that, that will run tests against the compiled.
Assuming you're writing Python tests against that.
Um, but if you make a change to the Rust, then you do have to have an extra step of building it.
So you type matcher in develop and then it would build it.
And then you could run py test or you, you might, and I recommend you do actually, if you're working with Rust and you're not very experienced.
I tend to have a test suite for Python, but also some tests in Rust because you get a much quicker feedback loop.
Cause you can type cargo test and that will compile it and run the test really quite quickly.
Um, one other thing I think it's worth having is that obviously if you have this binary that contains your Rust code, which is, you know, in the end, it becomes a module that you can import in Python.
But by default, that is obviously opaque to type checkers.
So things like IDs and static type checking can't look inside there and see what your functions are.
So you, you want to write a, a PYI file, which contains your definitions in like stub Python code effectively.
The problem you then have is you end up with two separate, definitions of what your functions have in them.
And so there's a really neat tool, which I didn't know about until quite recently, but I, we use it in Pydantic core where, which my partner,
where, which my pie can basically type check that the P P Y I file stubs match the definitions inside the DLL.
And so you can have like guarantees that when you've written in a P P Y I file, my function through bar takes a, isn't it?
B is a string and C is a list of bytes.
That's wild.
Uh, I didn't know about that.
Yeah, that's awesome.
It fixes altogether.
Is that my plugin?
Um, if you have a look at Pydantic core, we run it in CI or in maybe even pre commit.
So you can find it there.
I couldn't remember.
I discovered it because it, I, I, so like, like so often with so many of us, I discovered it because it had a bug.
And so it suddenly didn't do quite the right thing for me, but I mean, in general, it's been perfect until now.
Yeah.
It's plumbing until it doesn't work.
And then it's a flood.
Bug based discovery.
Definitely a thing we've all, we've all practiced.
Bug driven development.
Yeah.
Okay.
And if people want to check out these P Y I files, there's a project called type shed on GitHub that whose job is to basically become these, these so-called stub files for a ridiculous number of projects that, you know, we're talking about things that are not going to get upgraded.
Maybe they're never going to get type type you put on them, but you can go and pour one of these or whatever and get.
But also lots of packages now have their own, either they have types in them or they have a P Y I file that defines the types either in the Python code or in P Y I.
So yeah.
Yeah.
Awesome.
That's really cool.
I didn't realize about the, the tool there though, that does the integration.
That's awesome.
I think presumably you can use it to generate your first P Y I file.
Then you go in and put your doc strings in tweak things a bit and then you run it in test mode.
Oh, nice.
Yeah.
Cause that way use the, the, the true version, the rust version and to say, generate what I need to make this work.
That makes a lot of sense.
Yeah.
Awesome.
All right.
Well gentlemen, we're just pretty much out of time.
I guess let me, let me ask you one more, one more thing here.
And I don't think I pulled it up.
So I think it's, hold on.
Let me check my notes quickly checks notes for where this was one sec.
There's a new PEP called external wheel hosting.
Have you all heard of this?
I have not seen that particular.
Is that for, for wasm?
I know that I've been talking to a hood a fair bit about the challenges of uploading wasm wheels.
Uh, I know it has to do with more than it is five.
Here we go.
Copy link.
It is five, seven, five, nine.
And the idea that if you could, the, the nomenclature here is ridiculous.
It is in clever.
So the idea is that, you know, each build of Pydantic put 60 binary artifacts onto, onto PI PI.
And there's limitations on how large your projects can be and how large individual releases can be.
This is especially problematic for machine learning stuff.
Right?
And so the idea is could we create a wheel stub and what is a wheel sub calls with it's like the wheel without the content.
It's called a rim because wheels go on right now and all, there's all sorts of stuff like that in here, but it contains a hash and then a location where the thing actually lives.
Right?
So you mentioned open AI, for example, maybe they have some huge thing.
They want you to download eventually.
They could host it and you just publish the, the rim, not the wheel.
Do you know the story of why they're called wheels?
This, this entertains me a lot.
No, tell me.
So they're called wheels because you have wheels of cheese.
They're called wheels of cheese because the original PI PI was called the cheese shop, which in turn was called the cheese shop because there is a Monty Python sketch called the cheese shop where he goes in to buy cheese and then none of the cheeses he asked for available.
And it was called that as a way of taking the piss out of, I forget which other language.
It might've been Ruby or PHP, how their original package registry has no packages in it.
Like the cheese shops get in Monty Python.
And that has.
Oh my gosh.
Assisted to rims in 2024.
That's incredible.
Yeah.
I did know the cheese shop equivalent there that that was part of it, but I didn't realize that it was the wheels of cheese.
Okay.
Incredible.
There's a lot of, a lot of Monty Python.
You know, people that you look around everywhere.
The logo is the snake, right?
But the logo, the name is not Python, the snake.
It's Monty Python.
And I know, I mean, I always think if I wrote a book about Python, I'd want to have the night to say me in the front.
Yes.
I want the bunny, the killer bunny.
It's definitely a certain era of humor.
I don't know.
You know, it definitely dates Python in its way and us, perhaps, I fear.
Yeah, perhaps.
Perhaps.
I don't know what this gray hair is about, but we're going to go.
All right, guys.
Let's, let's close this out.
I'll give each of you a chance to just give us sort of a parting thought on integrating Rust and maybe thoughts and just
Rust and Python together.
I'll go, David.
Only really to say I am a better programmer for having learned to write Rust as well as Python.
And I, I failed to see the value in C anymore for new projects.
I get why it exists for lots of existing ones.
I'm not going to get into the issue of whether stuff should be rewritten in Rust.
But I think if you're starting from scratch, you're trying to write something high performance.
The experience of doing it in Rust is completely different from trying to do it in C or C++ or C# or any of the other, or Fortran or Julia or any of those other languages.
Rust is awesome.
So I'd really encourage people to, to give it a go.
And when you're giving it a go, you might also have a, give Logfire a quick go.
We're releasing our Rust SDK fairly soon.
We have Python already.
So we're matching the like Python Rust TypeScript ecosystem, which I think is the, like the stack to build with today.
Awesome.
I think my, my parting thought would be like, if you give it a go, don't be surprised if you feel quite inadequate.
It's really quite hard to sort of get your head around what's going on.
And I feel very much still at the beginning of my journey, but I, but nevertheless, I have actually managed to like deliver some stuff, which is valuable, even though, to be honest, I'm not like particularly proud of the code I'm writing.
It's like, you know, I'm a beginner again.
Um, and I just want to say like, don't let that put you off.
Um, and if you're confused, you know, just keep on, keep on going and trying to get your head around it.
It will make you a better programmer.
The book that I've found the best for learning Rust is the Rust programming language, which is a free book on the Rust website.
Right. Just click the learn button in the top, right?
Yeah.
Yeah. Awesome. Yeah. I'll also just add one quick thought as well to just follow up to what you said, David is whenever you're switching programming languages and you've been programming for a while, you just, you feel inadequate and you feel like I was so good.
I had it figured out. I could just sit down and do stuff. And now even how do I just read a file or just run a program? I'm lost all over again.
But every time you do that, your prior experience still carries over way more than it initially feels like it does.
Cool.
And you're not throwing everything away and starting over. You're, you're learning a neutral chain and then on you go.
Absolutely. And particularly when it's so easy to call Python from Rust and vice versa. And so you can build applications that are like hybrid of the two.
Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Well, congratulations both on some awesome projects and yeah. Thanks. Thanks for being here as well. Bye y'all.
Thank you so much.
Yeah. Bye.
Bye.